.. Copyright © 2022 Idiap Research Institute <contact@idiap.ch>
..
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause

.. _devtools.release:

Release Management
------------------

This package offers tools to release (tag) packages that follow Bob's
development guidelines.  It automatically updates the ``README.rst`` and
``version.txt`` files of the package to setup the correct version and pointers
for the release build and documentation badges.  The tools are setup to ensure
a changelog is provided with each release.  The changelog can be autogenerated
from merge-requests or commits in the target package.

.. warning::

   Releasing any package that is listed in the nightlies repository requires a
   green nightlies after all changes have been merged to the master branches of
   all packages. Do not release a package because it is green by itself. Its
   compatibility must be tested against all other packages first.

Usage
=====

Releasing Bob is a 4-step process:

1. Generate a changelog using ``bdt gitlab changelog``.
   * remove ``bob/bob`` from the changelog if it is present.
2. Tag a release using ``bdt gitlab release``
3. Release ``bob/bob`` manually.
4. Release ``bob/docs`` manually.

Use the ``--help`` flag in each command to learn more about each command.

.. note::

   If the package that you are releasing is not part of the nightlies
   repository, you can skip steps 3 and 4.

.. warning::

   While *beta* builds of packages will use the beta version of this package,
   *stable* will look for the **latest stable** version of this package for
   their build configuration.

   To **correctly** produce a release, ensure a **STABLE** version of
   bob.devtools is properly released **before** you start tagging packages.
   The builds will then use such version of this package to enforce the correct
   build environment during the packaging.

   If you forget to properly tag this package before doing so you risk building
   against the **wrong set of dependencies**.


Generate the Changelog
======================

After generating a ``changelog.md`` file using the ``bdt gitlab changelog``
command, you must edit the file manually. The structure of the file is
documented as part of the help message of ``bdt gitlab release``. Read it.

To manually update the changelog, follow these guidelines:

    1. For each tag, summarize the commits into several descriptive lines.
       These summaries become tag descriptions and they should extend/update
       the existing tag description. Therefore, each line of the summary should
       also start with ``*`` character like the tag descriptions.
    2. The last tag name is called ``patch``. This indicates that a patch
       version of this package will be automatically updated during the next
       tag/release. You can change ``patch`` to ``minor`` or ``major``, and the
       package will be then tagged/released with either minor or major version
       bump.  You may also set an explicit tag to the package (e.g.
       ``v1.0.0``), which may be required if no tags are available yet on
       gitlab.
    3. Once all commits were changed to corresponding tag descriptions (no more
       lines start with ``-`` characters), this package is ready for release
       and you can continue to another package in the changelog.


.. note::

   Remove the ``bob/bob`` line and its associated lines from the changelog if it
   is present. This package must be released manually.

.. warning::

   Identifying the correct version of each package is important. We follow
   semantic versioning (see https://semver.org/). Even if there are small
   breaking changes in the package, we should always bump the major version. Our
   conda packages rely on that.

Release the Package(s)
======================

Use the ``bdt gitlab release`` command to tag the release of each package. This
process is automatic but will take a long time to finish.

IMPORTANT: There are some considerations that needs to be taken into
account **before** you release a new version of a package:

* In the changelog file:

  - write the name of this package and write (at least) the next tag value.
    For the next tag value, you can either indicate one of the special
    values: ``patch``, ``minor`` or ``major``, and the package will be then
    released with either patch, minor, or major version **bump**.
  - Alternatively, you can specify the tag value directly (using
    a ``vX.Y.Z`` format), but be careful that it is higher than the last
    release tag of this package.  Make sure that the version that you are
    trying to release is not already released.  You must follow semantic
    versioning: http://semver.org.
  - Then, under the desired new tag version of the package, please write
    down the changes that are applied to the package between the last
    released version and this version. This changes are written to
    release tags of packages in the Gitlab interface.  For an example
    look at: https://gitlab.idiap.ch/bob/bob.extension/tags
* Make sure all the tests for the package are passing.
* Make sure the documentation is building with the following command:
  ``sphinx-build -aEWn doc sphinx``
* Ensure all changes are committed to the git repository and pushed.
* Ensure the documentation badges in README.rst are pointing to:
  https://www.idiap.ch/software/bob/docs/bob/...
* For database packages, ensure that the '.sql3' file or other metadata
  files have been generated (if any).
* Ensure the nightlies build is green after the changes are submitted if
  the package is a part of the nightlies.
* If your package depends on an unreleased version of another package,
  you need to release that package first.

Releasing the Bob meta package
==============================

Here are the instructions to release Bob meta package:

* Run:

  .. code-block:: sh

     $ cd bob
     $ bdt gitlab update-bob -vvv --stable

* The script above cannot identify linux only packages. After running the script,
  **you need to manually tag linux only packages** in ``conda/meta.yaml``.
  For example:

  .. code-block:: yaml

     - bob.ip.binseg ==1.1.0  # [linux]
     - bob.bio.face ==7.0.0  # [not arm64]

  Use ``git diff`` to make sure you have preserved the comments.

* Test the conda recipe of bob. You may want to *cancel* the command below once
  it reaches the unit tests:

  .. code-block:: sh

     $ bdt build -vv --stable

* Commit the changes and push:

  .. code-block:: sh

     $ git commit -m "Pinning packages for the next release. [skip ci]" conda/meta.yaml requirements.txt
     $ git push


* Tag the package using the same changelog mechanism that you used to tag other
  packages. Assuming the changelog has a ``* bob/bob`` entry:

  .. code-block:: sh

     $ bdt gitlab release -vvv changelog.md --package bob/bob

* When the script says ``Waiting for the pipeline *** of "bob/bob" to finish``, you may
  cancel it and check the progress online.

* You must revert the pins while in beta run:

  .. code-block:: sh

     $ git pull --rebase
     $ bdt gitlab update-bob -vvv --beta

* Like before, **tag the linux only or intel only packages manually** and make
  sure to preserve the comments.

* Commit and push the changes:

  .. code-block:: sh

     $ git commit -m "Remove package pins while in beta. [skip ci]" conda/meta.yaml requirements.txt
     $ git push

You can see that if we could have preserved the comments automatically, the
whole release process would have been only to run ``bdt gitlab release -vvv
changelog.md --package bob/bob`` given that we call ``bdt gitlab update-bob``
inside that command. Do you want to help fix that?

* Finally, manually edit the tag description of ``bob/bob`` and write a small
  summary of major changes of this release. Similar to:
  https://gitlab.idiap.ch/bob/bob/-/tags/v9.0.0


Release the docs meta package
=============================

Don't forget to release ``bob/docs`` after the bob release has successfully
finished. To do so, just go to https://gitlab.idiap.ch/bob/docs/-/tags and click
on ``New tag``. Use the same version number you used for ``bob/bob``.
